[music plays]
Rafael: I remember seeing an artist once
and I went up to him
and I watched him work.
It was really cool.
So I went home, found some paper,
found a pencil and
started drawing what I saw
I started watching a TV show as well.
It was Frankenstein.
I really liked that movie.
So I went to my desk,
got another piece of paper,
a pencil, and tried my best
to sketch Frankenstein's monster.
A lot of people have asked me,
“Wow! Yow you did that?”
Yeah, I did.
So, yeah, I started at seven,
just fooling around and sketching
and having fun simply
because I saw that sketch artist working
and he inspired me
to want to be an artist.
My name is Rafael Morales,
and I have a nickname with people
who know me, “R” as in artist.
[music plays]
I really like Sylvester Stallone.
I like him in Rocky,
I like him in Rambo.
When I was a kid growing up,
probably 13 or 14, I would draw him
and his face is really hard to draw.
He's got some interesting eyes,
so it would take me a while
to get good at it.
And the older I got, the more I practiced
until I got it just right.
I guess it's just part of my personality
that I'm a very creative
and thoughtful person
and I like to make adjustments
and changes as I draw.
Sometimes what I draw
is not exactly what I'm looking at,
but I definitely want to get the face
and make sure that that's recognizable.
But other times I'll get very creative
about the rest of it,
whether it's the background
or the characterization.
And I like to play
around with my art as well.
[music plays]
So I was born deaf,
and I remember thinking
when I was about five years old
that I was having difficulty seeing.
That's probably when
my eyesight began to change.
Colors didn't seem normal to me
like they used to.
They began to blur together, and I
couldn't always differentiate the colors.
When I would cross the street, many times
I wouldn't see cars coming
and I almost got hit
multiple times as a kid.
I didn't realize
that I had no peripheral vision
and I couldn't see oncoming traffic.
The older I got, the harder
it was to see,
especially even during regular daytime.
Currently, now I'm working on my iPad
and some of the different techniques are wonderful.
Pencil drawing,
using watercolor, design style,
oil design.
I can adjust all those,
so that allows me a lot of options
and different techniques.
And I don't see colors
as well as I used to,
it's very difficult
to see shades and words.
I have to get very close up.
20 years ago I could see very well
and I knew what I was drawing.
Now it's very difficult
to see words or print.
I can't read books.
Colors are not as clear
as they used to be.
And I know that I'm going to go
completely blind.
I grew up drawing and then I became blind.
So I wonder, am I the only one out there?
There's got to be somebody else out there
who is deaf and blind and can also
be an artist.
Yes. My neighbor,
Chris Cook, he's fully blind
and he makes amazing clay sculptures.
He's got a talent for it.
[music plays]
Chris: My name is Chris Cook.
I'm a DeafBlind person currently
living in Los Angeles, California.
I'm an artist primarily working in clay
and make many things out of it.
I started working with clay
when I was about 16,
and I've worked with
all different kinds, like kiln clay,
sculpture oven baked clay and air dry clay.
I make mostly animals out of clay
and sometimes figures
of people, but not as often.
Above this display is a miniature town
on the kitchen counter
between the living room and the kitchen.
It has a bay out front,
made partly of blue foam,
as well as buildings, trees, and vehicles.
Most of the buildings
are made out of paper,
except for the airport, which is plastic
and the church,
which is mud with a metal roof.
It took me several weeks
to make Cooksville.
Yeah, I named it after myself
after I was done with it.
I sell my sculptures to make money.
Everything you see along my walls is for
sale for different prices.
I use my teletype for around people
who don't know how to sign.
It's a device
that looks like a typewriter.
When people type on it, I can read
what they're writing on the other side
in braille.
I really enjoy listening to music.
My favorite kinds are rock and roll
and country music.
I can't make out the singing.
I can only make out the rhythm.
I used to be able to see
and hear in my early childhood,
but I started to lose my hearing
when I was 13 and my sight when I was 15.
By age 16, I’d lost all of my sight
and most of my hearing.
It was hard to accept the losses,
especially my hearing.
Rafael: Some of the things that I've adjusted
is I have to be careful
with where I'm focusing.
I have to see up close
with what I'm trying to draw.
Sometimes I'll have this weird feeling,
some internal feeling
and it makes me feel like I can't see
as well as I used to.
So I have to be very careful
when that feeling comes up,
I get much more emotional as I do my art.
Sometimes I miss details, I miss things,
and what I'm drawing doesn't
look exactly like what I intend.
It usually turns out well,
and I know I'm an artist
and my art has changed.
I like putting my art into competitions.
I've won several different awards.
I'm very fortunate
I think that I'm a skilled artist
and I've nurtured those skills.
It's just that I'm losing my eyesight
and I just have to create.
I have to put out there what I'm feeling.
As far as the future.
I don't know what
it's going to look like. I don't know.
I'm just going based on the inspiration
and the feelings that I have.
I'll keep doing my art as long as I can.
I can't really say exactly, but I think
I’m going to continue in some way or another.
Maybe I'll transfer
and do sculpture with clay.
I used to do a lot of pen art.
I'm very good with pen and ink art,
and I should be able to still do that
even if I go fully blind.
But I don't know.
It hasn't happened yet.
I'm going to keep trying, that's for sure.
I don't think that I need to see
what something exactly
looks like for me to try to draw it.
I can do things in grayscale
and I can approximate.
I know in the future, like I had mentioned,
that I may well go completely blind,
but I keep up with my work
and I keep up with my skills as best as I can
[music ends]